Okay, as a first move, you're saying something like "différance," or in this case "iteration,"
is the origin, right? But as origin, that thing doesn't function like an origin anymore.
So that would be the second, the second step would be the second thing.
And, you know, like, I don't understand, I mean, honestly, to me, when I reread the Searle response,
I don't understand, this strikes me as actually a fairly straightforward point, right?
The idea of the basic characteristic of writing is iterability, right?
It's capacity to go from one place to the next.
Now, where Derrida goes with that is one of the consequences is that that means that the mark is never self-identical.
That, I can see people being like, wait, hold on a second, like, I don't necessarily get that consequence, right?
Like, but I don't understand why Searle has such difficulty understanding the notion of iterability, right?
Like, that anything, the basic characteristic, and it's really clear in his response, like, he just doesn't, he just doesn't seem to get that.
He doesn't seem to get that, like, you know, because he makes the argument, he's like, look, there are plenty of situations in which people write something to one another.
Like, he gives the example of a grocery store note, like, you write a grocery store list, and Derrida is, you know, is like, but that's a perfect example of the nonsense.
Like, of course people can be present, the other can be present when you're writing, but for writing to work, it has to be possible for them not to be.
It's fascinating because that's the exact, like, critique that Nate was just describing with that third reviewer.
Like, to say, like, look, like, there is a structural, like, structurally, you know, like, we are all set up to participate in X.
Now, that doesn't mean that everyone is equally activating X at all times, or certainly not intending to, but that is a factor that is constantly there as a, you know, either as a more or less latent possibility, but always activated to some degree or another.
It's the same thing here, it's just like, you don't have to be absent from your writing, you just have to be able to be absent from the writing.
Well, and the fact that absence is constitutive in Derrida's case, I mean, it is a little bit, like, that is kind of a scary concept if you're invested in a metaphysics of presence or of self-presence, right?
I mean, it's like, if we're all activated by some sort of weird abyss or absence of self at all times, that makes everything ephemeral, right?
I mean, self-identity, cultural identity.
I mean, not ephemeral, because that's where, like, I don't, I don't follow on that one, like, because for me, it's not ephemeral, it's just iterative.
Yeah.
Like, it's, so that's, that's where it's important is that, like, iteration isn't absence, you know, absence actually would be just sort of reassuring, right?
It would just, well, it happens to not be there, right?
Yeah.
It's like, it's, it's, it actually is to me, it's, you know, like, what makes these marks work this way is context.
Which, by the way, is also made up of marks.
Right.
Like, iterated marks.
That just strikes me as, like, okay, here's what convention is.
When we say, like, here's a conventional way that we are, to understand one another, to have this conversation, we are relying on a whole series of conventions.
But the conventions don't come from God.
Yeah.
Right.
But I think you're coming at it from an already pretty sophisticated understanding of the conceptual terrain.
Like, for someone like Searle, or somebody just not, you know, knowledgeable of deconstruction, like, there's no firmness of the foundation, at least apparently, right, to this concept of iterability, right?
Like, yes, iterability, you know, instantiates convention, which instantiates self, or whatever.
But, like, that's still pretty precarious, as opposed to, like, the God foundation, or, like, selfness.
But, like, self's not a God guy, right?
No.
Like, I mean, and most of those folks are not.
Like, they're not, they don't believe in the transcendent dropping down.
They just don't, it's the Nietzschean critique of the madman.
They just don't follow out the consequences, right?
Right.
They're not pursuing that.
Well, even Austin.
Well, they don't, they can't accept the madness to take a hold of them.
I mean, like, you read all of that philosophy of language stuff.
Like, everything from, like, well, not, like, earlier Wittgenstein, you know, all the way up through Searle.
And it's like, look, we're going to approach this thing, but we have to have some kind of baseline to approach it from, and that thing is going to be some kind of, like, ordinary language.
Right.
And then we're going to use ordinary language, and then we're going to use ordinary language to examine ordinary language.
But it's very, very difficult to, like, keep an eye on the assumptions that you're operating with.
And, like, to me, I've never been, it's never been so clear to me as to how powerful the epigraph is in this, you know, still confining ourselves for simplicity to the spoken utterance.
Right.
I mean, like, that is just, it just is profoundly redundant in the way that it tries to assert the obviousness of a primacy of speech overriding, for a simplicity over complexity, for the capacity of thinking sort of like the safe, normal area that we can confine ourselves to, and then go to the extraneous material.
Without realizing that, like, you know, the ordinary is not safe, the ordinary is not stable, none of this kind of stuff, there's no safe starting point to be able to build out there.
Well, this is, and honestly, yeah, and for me, in the lecture, I felt like the most interesting part for me in thinking through it was exactly that point where I said, like, look, here's Searle's defense of Austin.
He's saying, Austin's not getting rid of jokes and plays and lies, he's just saying, in a fairly obvious way, that if you're going to understand speaking, you don't want to start with those.
And my reaction to that is, yeah, that makes sense, right?
That seems reasonable.
It's, like, there is that way in which that claim is like, yeah, if you're going to understand speaking, you don't start with actors on a stage, you don't start with people making jokes or telling lies, right?
I get that.
And what Derrida is saying is, the fact that it sort of seems reasonable to you, that's the problem, right?
Like, that's exactly, like, because it does, it does seem reasonable to me.
It seems like, okay, it's methodologically, like, it would never cross my mind for a moment to say that's a ridiculous presupposition until I read Derrida and go, wait, hold on.
You're saying, implicitly, you're saying that jokes and lies are less ordinary than direct, you know, honest locution.
It's like, that just seems ridiculous, right?
Like, they're all equally ordinary, so starting at one place, you know, is going to skew the way that you, the way you treat those things.
But most importantly, it points out to me, like, that was the interesting part for me on terms of the, like, the turn to affect, right?
Is that don't trust your gut.
Yeah, that's a good point.
Like, that's the conclusion, the conclusion for me was like, hey, this seems intuitively and at a gut level a reasonable decision.
But what that shows you is that your intuition in your gut is already constituted, you know, by those series of marks.
Yeah, and riven by context.
You can see, like, I mean, like, the sort of, like, the intuition list sort of, like, I mean, again, this is, like, oddly part of, like, analytic philosophy who, you know, is, you know, eschews generally sort of, like, the theological, like, God just planted ideas in our head.
But yet they have no problem with going to sort of, like, what intuitively makes sense within normal discourse as some sort of, like, baseline test for, you know, figuring out where the real thinking happens or where the real problem happens.
And that's, like, you know, that's so closely knit to, like, the traditional idealism.
It's like, you know, there are first ideas.
There are first ideas that, you know, just at that gut level you can't deny.
And, like, the possibility that those most baseline assumptions are constructed in some kind of way and that they're constructed differently for different people at different times is, like, I mean, I think this is going back to what Nate was saying.
It's, like, it's not that hard to intellectually follow that line of argumentation, but it's definitely hard to accept that because the consequences are so destabilizing if you feel like you need that, that stabilizing basis.
Right.
Well, but another way of saying it, and I, I, I mean, we were, what we were talking about before is, like, I feel like there's no real strong sense of history in that kind of thinking.
Yeah.
Like, for this kind of thinking, I think there's a strong sense of history.
Like, what gives it solidity to me is the fact that it's been iterated for fucking millennia, right?
Like, long pre-existing me, right?
And so, this, so, for instance, like, this interaction is an accretion of millennia of interactions of, of all kinds.
And I'm, I don't know, I'm super comfortable with that idea, I guess, or maybe I'm too comfortable.
And I think for a lot of people, it's like, no, no, no, no, no, no.
This, this is its own thing, and we can rely on that.
But, for me, the lesson of, like, don't trust your gut and don't trust your intuition is to say those, that intuition has been built, right?
Yeah.
It has, it has been made up over time.
Now, again, my lifetime was only, has only been 52 years, right?
Like, so, but it, it's, it's not just 52 years old.
And everything about me is made in the midst of, again, I just find that, that's solid.
I don't see that as unstable.
And, and that's so often, though, the critique of some kind of constructivism or some kind of relativism that, you know, like, well, if there aren't sort of, like, first truths, foundations, stabilities, then anything can be everything at any time.
It's like, well.
No, no, it can't.
Two out of those three are, are true.
Anything can be everything, but only having gone through the work.
And sometimes that work doesn't, it doesn't take very long or very much work, and some of that stuff would take millennia and, you know, like, enormous amounts of labor and whatever else, right?
It's like, but to your point, it's like, look, the earth is not solid.
Continents are drifting, right?
We're flying in space.
The sun's not lasting forever.
But it has enough inertia and enough stability for me to, for, well, not just me to carve out a pretty stable life, but an entire, like, you know, several millions of years of species to, like, evolve and die out and mutate.
You know, like, it's stable enough.
That's where the comfort and discomfort comes in, because I feel like John and maybe all of us are fairly comfortable with a radicalized notion of context and contingency.
And you can confront that and still, like, you know, assemble yourself and your scholarship after that.
For people like Searle and Austin even, like, they're trying to build taxonomies.
And that, a radicalized notion of context or contingency disrupts and destabilizes those taxonomies to the point where they don't function.
So, like, they're, that thinking context in the way that we're trying to do, like, doesn't enable those.
But it can still function.
Like, you can still, I mean, the point of the radical contingency would be there would be no invalid reason for a taxonomy either, right?
That's where the next two, the next two lectures are on critique.
Like, what is the basis for critique when you have this kind of, what I'm calling, like, a flat ontology?
Right.
So, you know, and, and, I mean, that to me is actually, like, the reason that we're, the reason that they're concerned with it is I think that you actually lose the basis for critique as being,
being able to say it's attributable to some fault in the thing.
Like, all you can, all you can say is it's not me or it's not, you know, that's all you can really say.
And I found that, like, that's a much more interesting pluralist direction to me is, as opposed to saying you're wrong, meaning your thing doesn't cohere with the state of affairs, right?
Like, there, you have to come up with other ways of thinking critique and it just, it just shows, like, the extent to which some fundamental notion of truth is so fucking powerful.
Like, even the people who are not invested in a big metaphysical godlike idea of it are still committed, you know, to that, like, I have to be able to tell someone they're wrong, right?
You know?
Right.
Or I have to believe that I'm right would be the flip side of it, right?
Like, either one.
It doesn't matter which one you choose.
But it's like, no, yours is an intervention into the world, again, based on a whole series, like, an accreted series of ways of looking at things that can do lots of, like, speech act theory can do lots of interesting and useful work,
regardless of whether or not its premises are, like, that Austin doesn't follow out the general theory, right?
Though, I've got to say, you know, it's such a difference for me between Searle and Austin.
It's precisely Austin's willingness to follow that line of thinking.
You know, like, what's that line?
I think maybe Derrida cites it, the, you know, isn't it exhilarating to feel the firm grip of a foundation slipping beneath our feet?
Like, you know, as he's trying to build this taxonomy and, you know, the taxonomy itself is showing him holes or contradictions or whatever else,
he's got to, like, all right, chuck this one over my shoulder and let's try another one.
And, you know, he has a very sort of iterative approach.
And, you know, that's, like, I mean, to me, that's incredibly admirable.
And, you know, like, he goes from, he really, he does, like, very experimentally kind of go from,
hmm, there is this sort of, like, odd, peculiar form of speech that doesn't mean things.
You know, it does things.
Let's call it the performative.
Now, let's figure out how they work.
Oh, as I sort of, like, figure out section four sub point three C, you know, I realize, shit, all, everything is a performative,
even though it's supposedly constitutive utterances, like, have, you know, a performative dimension to them as the, like, that I think or I declare or I posits.
And, you know, then suddenly he's willing to follow it through.
And it's, like, it's slow and it's meticulous.
And, you know, like, in some ways you're, like, you know, I'm going to speed you up, JL.
But it's certainly, you know, he doesn't seem like, he's certainly not stubborn.
But why the recovery and possibly even privileging of the Constative in Austin?
Like, why doesn't Austin get to Derrida?
Like, at least from Derrida's perspective, like, he's still kind of attributing a failure to Austin.
He might not say that.
He will not go to the general theory.
Right.
Like, he can't.
I mean, that's Derrida's claim.
What disenables him from doing that, you know?
Like, he didn't write lecture 11.
I don't know.
No, no, no.
I don't think it's that.
Because that's another interesting thing.
I mean, in rereading How to Do Things with Words again, he abandons the performative constitutive by about lecture 9 or 10.
He's like, those categories just don't work.
And that's where illocutionary, perlocutionary, you know.
And I don't think it's just that he didn't figure it out.
I do.
I think that Derrida's right in a sense of, like, he puts off till later this question of the general theory.
But the general theory would have been iterability.
And it would have been, like, everything can go everywhere at any time.
That's a constitutive possibility.
Now, why doesn't it, right?
Is then the next, like, everything doesn't go everywhere all of the time.
And so thinking of a logic of convention or context or whatever, so that's just a different project than the one that he set himself out on, right?
Like, that's my take.
But, again, he's totally fine changing that project, right?
Like, I mean, you know, I mean, like, look, I think you're right, again, that there's a certain fear.
There's a certain, like, if anything can go everywhere all the time, you know, at least from this perspective, that's scary.
Don't follow that through and see where it takes me.
But he's all, and I think that shows itself the most.
And, again, his sort of, like, assumption that, all right, well, if I'm going to abandon, you know, the language of the true false, at least at the level of the performative or elocutionary, which is going to kind of become everything, then, you know, I've got to figure out a different term that, that, what's the word I'm looking for?
Right, but I mean, like, I think Derrida's answer to that is, well, he does all of those things, and that's what's interesting about it, but he's still committed to the horizon of consciousness as being the baseline.
Like, it's going to all, you know, yes, it is not the transmission of a preexisting idea, as it is in most versions of communication, but it is still about felicity and felicity.
What makes something felicitous?
Well, it's because I wanted to accomplish, like, you know, the way that we, the way that I just narrated the situation with the teaching award, right?
Like, it's like, okay, I had an intention and attempted to manage things in a particular direction, right?
Like, that's the first thing.
So, in other words, there's a wall, there's a barrier that he's like, look, the sort of, the communicative apparatus can go all wonky, but it's always sort of subordinated to the intention.
Yeah, which is what keeps it from going, you know, if consciousness was wonky, then language would be more, like, would be wonkier.
But that's, that's the fear, that's, that's where I'm saying, I don't feel like, if you say consciousness is non-self-present, I just don't feel like you, I don't feel like you lose anything.
Anything, right?
Like, I understand that people feel like you lose everything.
But I don't, I don't get that.
That used to, that was a thought that terrified me as an undergrad.
Because, you know, because I was always the most pulled by philosophies of the mind, philosophies of, like, the self, like the constitution of the consciousness or soul or whatever, whether it was Plato or Descartes or whoever.
And, like, that, like, I mean, it was in some ways, like, a driving force, like, I don't care what it looks like, it can be, you know, different than I would imagine it, but I have to be able to have some kind of stabilizing sense.
I don't even know what stability looks like right now.
And when I look back on that now, I can remember how it felt, but I don't remember why it felt that way.
I don't remember, like.
Yeah.
Yeah, I remember, yeah, I remember that feeling being a little more daunting or, you know, scary, even just a few years ago.
Like, the notion that you're not self-directed, like, or that there's too many contingencies to fully account for the direction of yourself, your intentions, your motivations, et cetera.
But then, like you're saying, John, I mean, it's like, it's not like that situation in itself is scary, first of all, because, as Derek was arguing, it's just an ontological fact.
It's just the case.
Right, right.
So it's like, it's not like you can battle against that.
Well, lots of things are scary that are the case, like lions and tigers and death, right?
It bears, right, right.
Yeah.
But it's interesting there, because, I mean, in a certain sense, there's a definition of consciousness built in there, which is the anxiety about its not being in the center.
Like, what consciousness is, is an anxiety of its sort of non-control.
Because, in many ways, we're saying, just be more materialist about this and really think of consciousness as a material, as a material phenomenon.
As a machine.
Right?
Like, yeah, and it's like, at least to me, honestly, for me, that idea or that thinking is so fucking liberating.
Like, it's just like, oh, I don't have absolute responsibility.
I don't have total control.
I don't have total awareness.
Like, I can't have any of those things.
And so I can be a lot less neurotic.
That doesn't mean don't pay attention.
It doesn't mean just, like, take things as they come.
It can just mean you intervene the way that you intervene and things go as they go.
Right.
Well, that's the other fear, right?
Not just the sort of the I'm not in control or the anxiety of not being in the center.
But the sort of, like, I mean, as another stabilizing mechanism of, you know, the moralization of action.
That, you know, I, you know, if I'm not stable or self-present, then I can't be guilty or, you know, laudable for, you know, my actions.
That's the neutral line, right?
And neither can anyone else.
And then if that happens, then it's all chaos.
And it's always interesting that it's like, you know, it can't be the case because I don't have, yeah, I don't have the capacity to, you know, I will go back to critique to say, you're wrong, I'm right.
Or I'm even, or even I'm wrong and you're right, right?
Because there's a certain, like, comfort in that.
You know, even when it's a bad outcome, at least I know where I'm at in relationship to the thing.
What's a little strange about this essay is that most of the stuff that we're talking about, we're extending the implications.
We haven't talked, we haven't even talked about the essay.
But what I'm, but I mean, it's like, the, all of these things are kind of loaded into Derrida's thinking, but they're not explicitly articulated in this essay.
He's talking about, like, the sort of details of speech acts and writings.
And he's not getting, he's not even really hinting at the ethical implications or about the anxiety, the potential anxiety of a metaphysics of presence and being invested in that.
And I actually think it might have been useful to at least point towards some of that stuff because that's almost necessary to think through some of the consequences that he's saying Searle refuses to admit or that Austin kind of refuses to acknowledge.
Because, like, a lot of that anxiety regarding the loss of self-presence, that's almost like a structural component of this thing.
And I don't feel like we get a lot of that in SEC.
Like, it's just...
That's a more existentialist...
Right, right, but I'm saying, like, even just, like, a paragraph, like, would have kind of elucidated some of these points that we're talking through.
It would have made, at least for me, I'm just being selfish here.
It would have made the essay more, given it more import for my thinking.
You know what I'm saying?
I mean, I see, like, his point of departure isn't so much, like, isn't it fascinating that no one is able to, you know, like, contravene or sort of, like, think through the...
The supposed obviousness of all of these assumptions.
Like, that's not a starting point.
It's like, look, everyone thinks this is just so obviously the case.
I'm going to demonstrate how it's impossible.
And, you know, I mean, like, you know, that's a launch of what, in many ways, is a pretty straightforward critique.
I mean, I think in many ways a generous critique, but it is a critique.
There isn't then the second move to then say, and why in the world are we all so self-assured of this thing, right?
And that would turn toward the existential conversation.
I mean, I can imagine, I don't know anything about the composition of this thing, but I can imagine, like, at some point people were like, oh, man, this performativity thing, this is really cool.
Like, you should check this out.
This is really smart versions of language.
And he read it, and he was like, eh, it's not all that, right?
Like, it's still privileging consciousness.
And then he built the whole context argument, you know, the front end of the context is like, I'm giving a paper.
So, you know, the whole communication stuff was like, hey, here's how we can reduce the meaning of the word communication at the context.
There isn't a notion of context.
Like, the whole thing seems to me to sort of lead towards what he basically, I mean, it is.
And it's a critique, and that's the beef I have with this essay, is that I believe very much that one could read Austin quite differently.
And one could do the critique move on Austin and then show Austin pushing through that move, right?
Like, I do think that that's the case.
So, Austin retains a privileging of consciousness, but only if you stop at, like, lecture 10, right?
Like, or 11, right?
Like, I mean, you could, the category of the elocutionary, again, he does remain oddly beholden to a pretty conventional notion of Austin's intention.
I mean, he does.
Like, even his response to Searle.
And that's, to me, that's the point at which, like, I find myself, I always, every time I read it, I just have this kind of bristling response to those moments where I'm like, he didn't have to go there.
He didn't have to do that.
Again, whatever.
It's not like, so he's not me.
That's all I'm really saying.
And that's okay.
And I've got to say, like, you know, you have to wonder what kind of, you don't have to wonder.
It's actually really obvious.
Like, running this through the framework of a critique allows, like, allows this to be read and understood and disseminated and gained traction in ways that what you're suggesting, which I think I agree would be more interesting, but the number of people that would be able to follow through it, I mean, like, this is not exactly an accessible essay, right?
So he's already, you know, speaking to a pretty small percentage of people.
And then to make the move that you're suggesting would shrink that, I think, even more.
I mean, you know, there's a reason why, you know, for every person that knows Deleuze, three people know Derrida.
I mean, and think about Deleuze's, like, the critiques of Deleuze's historical figures is, I love those readings.
And I can never read, you know, Kant or Hume or, I mean, Spinoza or any of those others, like, with, like, they've been so thoroughly, well, penetrated by.
Deleuzified.
Deleuzified, right?
That, you know, I can't read, I think they're phenomenal.
But very few people think that they are sort of, like, well, that's not Kant.
It's like, it is now.
Someone, you know, like, anything can be everything, and Deleuze did the work to make Kant that, right?
Like, I can't, I don't know what it would be like to live in a world where Kant isn't that anymore.
And let's not underestimate it, and this is something I'd give just a passing nod to in the lecture, but we wouldn't know Derrida, right?
Like, if, the function of critique, right, allowed, was one of the things that I think allowed him, and it's those moments, the moments that I bristle at, there's those moments that allowed him to be like, here's deconstruction, right?
And sort of produce it as an international, I mean, not only that, there are many other things, but nevertheless, that kind of institutional recognition that allows us to have this conversation today, right?
Was, because he's saying, I am not Searle, or Austin, or ordinary language philosophy.
John, he is just taking a deep breath, and then saying, I'm going to do my quantitative analysis very briefly, and then move on.
Yeah, yeah.
He made the decision.
But you're right.
I mean, he is.
That's the move that he makes there.
Now, again, this is where the critique thing comes in later.
Like, he has, you know, in terms of the beef that he has with Searle, again, I'm of two minds, because on the one hand, I'm sympathetic, having heard similar kinds of things from various people in response to my stuff.
Like, I get, I understand that you get to a point where you're just like, I am so fucking tired of this, I'm going to eviscerate it.
Like, I totally get that.
At the same time, it is premised on this idea that Searle misunderstood me.
And so he, and it's like, so again, he's going to say, I'm not relying on the self-identity of meaning.
There isn't just one me here.
But I am going to rely on this notion of the norms, the conventional norms of reading that Searle is either not capable of.
So there's, you know, an implicit sort of arrogance to it.
Again, institutionally, that functions really well.
That makes Derrida recognizable.
It creates all kinds of, you know.
And that's also why SEC is, it circulates more widely and is better known than Limited Inc.
Because, I mean, largely because, you know, you're right, he still does a lot of that.
But he's also so careful to try to circumscribe, or not circumscribe, circumvent you from saying that.
Because he's like, who, like, was I misunderstood?
If so, by whom?
And then, you know, like, then Searle isn't simply Searle.
He becomes, you know, Searle Limited Inc., right?
That's right.
So, you know, like, the question, like, on one hand, he's like, you fucking idiot, you misunderstood me.
But in every single move of saying that, he complicates, wait, what, who misunderstood me?
How?
What would misremembering?
What would be me?
Right?
And so he's constantly undermining.
You know, and talking about therapy right here, like, you know, imagine, like, you know, Derrida has that desire to eviscerate you.
You just didn't understand me at all.
And you didn't care to even try.
I'm going to eviscerate you.
And then I'm going to turn my desire to eviscerate you and the very mechanisms by which I'm going to eviscerate you into a line of thinking.
And let it undo itself.
That's actually, I have got a lot of admiration for that.
You know, when you think about him being that fucking pissed off at a moment.
Yeah.
It's a lot of tension, though, and kind of like a, even a contradiction at the heart of the project, then, in that case.
Because deconstruction, in sort of a semi-vulgar sense, as we're talking, is like a marketing enterprise, where he's like, it's almost just critique it in that sense.
But deconstruction, at its most rigorous, is a thorough inhabitation of a text, even if he's still making those cutting gestures.
He's not saying that his interlocutors, like Rousseau, are wrong.
Like, he's rendering them.
Or even here.
No, no, he's not.
Yeah.
And he's saying that they're symptomatic of a certain type of thinking.
But that certainly doesn't, it means they're almost too correct.
Like, Austin is so right that it makes him problematic.
But again, even to say that, that's not even as different of a claim as I think that you think that it is.
Because in that case, you're saying you're symptomatic of a way of thinking.
You're saying that way of thinking is one thing.
It's called humanism.
It's called metaphysics or whatever.
So even that move is still a kind of self-identifying move that, again, there are always marks and traces that allow a different way of doing that.
Like, that's where you could do the, I mean, I have no problem with the critique move that he does on Austin.
I just think it would have been a more interesting essay for me if, in addition to that, part three had been, Austin recognizes this and does other things differently later.
Right?
Like, in other words, turn Austin against Austin.
Instead of saying, Austin doesn't recognize the brilliance of his, yeah, yeah.
Right.
He doesn't, he doesn't, Austin's unable to get to iteration.
It's like, but no, Austin, in other words, what's the problem?
Is he doesn't consciously recognize, right, iteration?
I mean, that's the problem, right?
And that's what Derrida will rely consistently on a notion of rigor.
Right?
It's not rigorous enough.
And I'm like, well, what the fuck is rigor other than the horizon of conscious awareness?
Yeah.
Right?
And again, I'm totally, let me also say, I have learned so much from Derrida because of his commitment to that kind of rigor.
And it's constituted me, so, you know, the idea of me critiquing it is itself kind of ridiculous.
But I do have those, every time I read this, I have these moments of like, ugh.
This is why we need cranky John swag for the podcast.
Like, even Derrida gets it.
Deleuze, Hegel, obviously, Heidegger, and, yeah, there needs to, yeah, there's cranky John, merch.
Yeah.
But again, this is a really complicated, problematic, because it's like, how do you make it, I mean, maybe the question is like, how do you not make an intervention?
Or like, how do you make an intervention that doesn't negate in any way?
Becoming indiscernible.
Right, right.
Becoming indistinguishable in Deleuze.
Like, yeah.
Right.
Well, so, I had a thought along those lines, just, you know, thinking about, you were talking about, like, how he uses critique to, in many ways, undo critique, right?
So, I mean, like, in one way you could read that is, like, using the master's tools.
But in this case, he's like, showing how the master's tools don't even do what the master thinks that they do.
And then, you know, like, when you're talking about how, like, for you, it would be more interesting if he didn't make those moves, or if he brought them full circle a little bit.
Is he just making a joke out of critique?
Yeah, I mean.
Is he mobilizing critique to make fun of?
I mean, to, well, not make fun of critique, but to bring a certain kind of, if you follow through on his argument, you know, on, if you follow his line of thinking,
then what he is, his so-called critique can't be a critique.
And he had to have known it all the way, you know.
But, okay.
It was doing to Derrida what you were hoping Derrida was doing to Austin.
Doing to Austin, yeah.
So, that would be a next kind of move.
I also do think that there's a reason for thinking that those moves serially, like what we were talking about at the very beginning of, like, you know, the first move is saying difference is an origin.
And then the next move is saying the nature of difference means that it can't function as an origin.
Like, it problematizes the whole function of an origin.
And I think that the serial making of those points, and I actually take that to be a pretty Derridian point, right?
Like, you know, the importance of that seriality, like to hook into one point in order to then unhook that point.
You know, whereas I feel like what I get from Deleuze is just, like, there are no origins.
Yeah.
You know.
And that resonates a lot more.
So, what you have then is just interventions and cuttings, right?
Like, without recourse to even a notion of convention as your justification.
Or even a notion of what are you critiquing?
Like, is there a serial?
Is there an Austin?
Certainly not one, right?
Like, I mean, certainly not, right?
But, like, even a particular, I mean, it's easy to say that at the level of the subject, but is there even a line?
Right.
Right?
Like.
Yeah.
I mean, because it really then forces you just to think, you know, none of this stuff pre-exists the configuration, right?
Like, it is the performance of the critique that produces an Austin or a serial to be critiqued.
And the only question is, what kind of, what version of serial or Austin does it produce?
That's right.
That's where I love it.
I mean, the refrain for me of these three lectures that I quoted, and this is paraphrasing it, but it's like,
the theory of speech acts is made up of speech acts.
Right?
Like, that's the thing that I feel like, you know, Searle doesn't think through, and most people don't, right?
Like, that you're cutting even as you're describing what cutting is.
Yeah.
Right.
Well, I mean, just think about how much of the academy or just, like, the Western tradition of knowledge production writ large is,
is that, like, the method, the tool, the observation has to be distanced from the object of study.
And it gets really messy when the object of study becomes the method or the tool.
It has to be.
Like, it has to be.
Right.
And, you know, it's like every time, you know, even when I want to examine language or examine consciousness or examine myself,
you know, there's always the performative move of distancing the examining version of myself from the examined version of myself.
Right.
And you want to be able to believe the examining part of me isn't caught up in this chain of relationships, but it always, always is.
And that's really, and it doesn't have to become the object of study to be caught up in those relationships.
I guess that's an interesting way of saying it for me because I guess I feel like the anxiety that one feels at that idea is what, like,
the feeling that you can't separate yourself, right, the feeling that you are at stake, right,
the desire that fuels it, that fuels what produces that anxiety is, like, there's got to be a point, like, a subject removed from its object, right?
There's just got to be, like, that sort of necessity of separating something out in order to look at it or to comment on it in some way.
And if they're both moving simultaneously, it's a feeling like there's, what, there's no point that I can rely on its stability.
And so when all of the points are moving at the same time, then you have a solar system, right?
Like, you have actual life.
But, so that's, okay, so that's interesting.
Like, consciousness is anti-life, right?
Yeah.
Like, it's an attempt to repudiate.
That would make total sense within Nietzsche's economy.
Yeah.
And to lose.
For sure.
By the way, it just occurred to me, we have talked about this at this, like, this is not going to make any sense to anyone.
Like, this really might be the throwout podcast because I just don't think this is going to make any sense to anybody.
We've said that, this is interesting to me, very interesting.
I agree.
Because we've said that, I think, about every Derrida episode.
Yeah.
Is it true?
And, you know, like, one of the, I think, it was maybe the Plato's Pharmacy one.
It's like, how do you, you know, we started with Hegel, which we all had, was all alien to us to a certain degree.
And, like, you know, a lot of the stuff that we've done, Heidegger was certainly alien to us to a certain degree.
And, you know, we focus on the text more then.
But every single Derrida one, it's like, there's a repulsor beam that prevents us from going to the text and thinking through it more, sort of like.
Why is that?
That's interesting.
I think you're right.
Yeah.
And every single Derrida one, it's so, like, it's been a launching point for really great idiosyncratic conversation.
I totally agree.
But it seems to be a symptom of intimacy.
Yeah.
Right.
We don't talk about the argument or the essay hardly at all, right?
Like, it's like, we're like, okay, we presume that we all kind of understand the basic moves here.
And now we're like, what are the implications of these moves?
And how do we follow that somewhere else?
I just think for a listener to this, it's just not going to make any sense.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, it's a real question.
Like, how do we proceed talking and thinking about and especially exposing?
And others to the thinkers that we're the most intimately connected with?
Because, you know, what we could do is sort of like, we're going to detail it out and explain it to you.
But I have a feeling that would feel more sterile than it would have with Hegel or anyone else.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I'm also like, I'm not sure any of our conversations have made any sense.
Like, you know, like to a lay audience, I mean, what are you going to expect from, you have to have theory people listening to this.
We have little sections where we're just shooting the shit.
Anybody could listen to that.
But once you get into the weeds with any of these thinkers, there's a select few who are going to be able to key in and be like, oh, yeah.
Like, and be able to follow our conversation.
So I don't, I don't think.
But I just think, but in some of our episodes, that select few has been larger.
And in other ones, they've been smaller.
And I kind of agree with the Derrida ones.
It might be an audience of three and we're all here.
Right, right, right.
On one level, that's true.
But on another level, like, what we're talking about, I mean, really, what we're talking about is the sort of everything being at play simultaneously.
Like, every concept, everything, every word, every, you know.
And that, to me, actually seems like a totally commonplace sort of problem, even if it's not theorized as such.
Meaning, that's something that anyone who traffics at all in theory is, like, experiences, right?
Like, that sort of, we're talking about as anxiety or whatever else.
So, you know, to me, that's the point at which I feel like Derrida, Derrida's the one who shows you the extent to which everything is at play.
Like, the things that you thought, I mean, that's where I feel like the displacing of the grounds of logic.
Displacing, not eradication, not erasure.
But the displacing, in other words, showing you the movement through which, you know, the law of non-contradiction or whatever, like, is suspended, right?
That, like, holding up this placard and being like, hey, there really is a solar system, and it's not a picture of, you know, a bunch of different planets.
It's actually all orbiting all of the time, and that's what to live is.
Right.
You know?
Yeah, I mean, and I don't know why I want to phrase it this way, but, like, could you, like, right, I mean, deconstruction is usually posed as, like, a critique of binaries or a critique of absolutes.
But, I mean, could you say, this seems like such an undergrad comment, but could you say that context for Derrida, in this sort of radicalized sense, maybe you could call it contingency, that's, like, the one absolute?
Like, where you can't escape context or contingency in any final way.
You can't make that cut between subject and object.
So, if Derrida were to entertain an absolute, it would have to be context.
Well, I would say it this way.
You can make any cut, right?
Like, you know, you can make the subject-object cut.
It's just that it's a cut.
Yeah.
Right?
It's an intervention.
It is an action.
So, you know, you can, there are plenty of absolutes.
It's not just that logic is displaced.
It's multiplied as well.
And we're making the subject-object cut one cut of many.
Right.
But wouldn't the subject-object would be a provisional cut?
Wouldn't it be for Derrida?
Everything is a provisional cut.
Everything would be provisional cut.
Everything is provisional and absolute?
Yes.
No, that's right.
Like, in that sense, like, or I would say it this way.
What the absolute is, is a particular style of provisional cut.
Yeah.
So, one can cut provisionally and call it provisional,
and one can cut provisionally and call it absolute, right?
Which we, by the way, we've had this conversation over and over again,
because what that means from a Derridian, Delusian perspective
is very different than what it means from a Hegelian perspective,
because, you know, like, imagining the flat playing of imminence,
you know, Delus would say, like, yeah, people cut as if they're absolutes all the time,
and those cuttings have very particular styles,
very particular ramifications,
but they're never able to transcend the ontological plane, right?
They don't do what they think they're doing,
but, you know what, basically nothing does,
so that doesn't make them any better or worse than anything else.
I'm thinking about this from the perspective of,
I mean, I'm trying to think about how to make it more applicable
outside of the sort of, like, the discourse on speech act theory,
and just think about it in terms of law, writ generally,
like, not even, you know, the, like, in the realm of, like, the natural law.
And the impulse, you know, again, I think of a very, like, an impulse very much so rooted in anxiety.
People say, all right, well, if God's not running the show,
there are laws that transcend physical interactions,
and, you know, we can use science to sort of discover them and enumerate them
and figure out the qualities of them.
And so that means that any interaction between any two physical bodies, right,
is governed by a transcendent law that says these are the things that you can do,
these are the things that you cannot do.
And, like, what it would be to flatten law,
which we just think is essentially, constitutively transcendent.
What would, like, law changes in a pretty fundamental way
when we think about it as imminent to everything else, right?
Yes.
Kafka's before the law.
Yeah.
Right.
One's standing face-to-face with the doorkeeper.
One just imagines that there's a storyline of future doorkeepers.
Yeah.
And by, so, like, I mean, so there are two things operative here.
One for all of the things supposedly governed by law,
and then for law itself, that, you know, on the one hand,
there is no transcendent law.
There are only the particular effects of forces working on each other, right?
And then, two, one of those forces moves in a style that we call law.
Yeah.
And that is...
Well, it moves in a style that projects,
retroactively projects a sense of transcendence.
Yeah.
A sense of transcendence.
Right.
But the important point would be transcendence doesn't preexist.
Transcendence is retroactively posited as preexistent.
Again, Lacan on the real, right?
Like, I mean, we've got many versions of that.
Build a sense of transcendence on the, yeah, on the flat plane.
Right, right.
So, yes, I mean, it's, it's, so, yeah, the, that sense of law is the same as saying
speech act theory is a series of speech acts.
Yeah.
You know, that you are performatively constituting or cutting or elocutionarily cutting even
the elocutionary, right?
Like, and, and, and that notion, I mean, it's like, it's, it's a question of regularities.
It's like, look, gravity seems to be a fucking concept that plays out in, in a vast majority
of cases, except black holes and event horizons, right?
Like, I mean, you know, so there's always these exceptions and you say, well, it's a law,
but it's a law, like every law has exceptions in, in that sense.
And you say, for these types of bodies, these things seem to regularly work this way in conjunction
with one another.
But that's just like a matter of frequency.
It's like, yeah, you know, when I tune my radio into the right station, then I get that
broadcast, but I get outside of those parameters and it's something else.
And you know, like, I mean, there is such like a, a, a privileging of, you know, the, a human
point of origin because you think, well, you know, when things get really, really big, then
the laws of gravity change.
When things get really, really fast, they change.
When they get really, really slow, they change.
When they get really, really small, they change.
And then you realize, wait a second, really, really big compared to what?
Really, really small compared to what?
Us, right?
Like, cause you have to realize there's an infinite, you know, like scope of bigger from
that, that, that takes what we take as really, really big as a starting point.
And then there's an infinite scope of really, like, smaller from that takes what we take as
really, really small as a starting point.
So you just started talking about space and you freaked me out.
I know, I know, I know.
Have we gone through my aversion to space?
I know.
But it is, it is the problem.
It is the same anxiety question that we're talking about.
Yeah.
Like, it's, yeah, I can't think about that.
I can only think about it as a model, as a static model.
But we think about, like, our experience as an infinite array, right?
Like, we're, we're in the middle and then there's infinite in one direction and there's
infinite in another direction.
And then if you're going to take infinity seriously, you have to realize that that scope,
that band of infinity is infinitesimally small compared to, like, forget about there are
exceptions to gravity.
The vast majority of probably existence is an exception to what we take to be the norm
of gravity.
Yeah.
Well, thanks.
Now I feel a lot better.
But that's why, that's kind of also why I wanted to suggest that, like, the aleatory has
to be some sort of God term in Derrida.
Like, not in, not in the sense that Derrida doesn't know that he's using that way.
This is not a critique of Derrida, but, like, context, contingency, the aleatory, that has
to function in the place of the, the mover, the grand mover.
But it would have to be, the aleatory there would have, have no transcendent function whatsoever.
Yeah.
That's, yeah.
I mean, that's, that's where, right.
Differance is the word for that.
Yeah.
Right.
Like, the non-self identity, non-self presence.
Of everything.
Which would mean that, like, non-self presence doesn't cover anything.
Right.
It's, it's very important that that's not a God term.
Like, he very explicitly explains why that isn't the transcendent.
Well, but I mean, not, not in that explicitly trans, I mean, it's, you can see how it's
still fun.
If that's the grounding, ungrounding principle.
But it's not the ground.
It's not.
It's not a ground.
Ungrounding.
That's the crucial part.
That's why I said ungrounding.
But that is, you are, to me, what you're doing there is Hegelian, which is like, hey,
I want to map this into the oppositional framework because it's the only way that we have to
understand.
And you're right.
I mean, you're right about that.
Well, and Derrida, even in the Difference essay, he acknowledges that.
He's like, listen, like, there's only so many ways you can articulate this non-concept.
And a lot of them are going to kind of slip into what looks like a negative theology.
You know, and he, so he's acknowledged.
Let's think about negative theology.
You can appropriate it.
But it's not.
No, it's not.
It's not a negative theology for him.
But I mean, it kind of is.
Like, there's a way.
No, it not kind of is.
But it's not, it doesn't escape metaphysics, right?
I mean, like, we, like, you know.
It doesn't.
You're right.
It doesn't escape metaphysics, but it's not theological in that.
Like, I mean, at least for him, you know, I think he's very much at pains to say there
isn't a God.
Difference is not the subtle God term that functions a lot like it.
I mean, that's, the negative theological, the issue there is that there is no super
essentiality called God.
Right, right, right.
But so, like, what would it be to flatten out metaphysics as well?
Because, you know, like, the question of escaping metaphysics has a very contextualizing sort
of operation on it.
Like, as if there is a domain called metaphysics, it's inescapable for us, and we could imagine
an outside to it that, I don't know, is only approachable by the overman or absolute spirit
or whatever, right?
Heidegger's hut in the Black Forest.
Those are the only three things that could escape it.
But, you know, to imagine, like, rethink Derrida's claims about the unavoidability of metaphysics
and now not, don't think of them as a terrain that have a boundaries, but think about them
as, like, the network of associations that, like, look, in order to be able to say anything,
it's attached to, it's not being governed by, it's not within the terrain of, it is attached
to a whole bunch of other stuff, contingently.
Some of them very strongly, those threads are very, like, very strong and robust, some
of them weaker, some of them faster, some of them slower, but it's about an attachment
that would give the mirage of a terrain when you think about them as a whole, but it's not,
it's not in a container, right?
So, like, you know, being is not in a container.
It is just a word that has attachments to other words that in their sort of, like, in the structure
of their attachments have, like, developed different senses, different consequences, different
forces.
Right.
Yeah.
And, I mean, context and difference, that's what even enables the illusion of the container
in the first place, you know, like, of metaphysics or otherwise.
Yeah, that's right.
Like, that's what, I don't know.
I just, I really love the, it's just a suggestion on the first or second page, because it reminded
me of stuff you've said in class, John, and, you know, that we just don't have an adequate
notion of context.
But it's like, when you start confronting that question, it's like, well, you can't have
an adequate notion of context, because context is what both provides the condition of possibility
for conceptuality and unravels and erodes conceptuality from within.
So, it's like, what are you going to, there's no, like, all right, we got the concept of context
down, and now we get to move forward, you know.
Well, this is why, like, one can never, you can't avoid making contexts, and you can never
defend your context compared to someone else's, or one context against another one, right?
That, like, you can never, I mean, I'm thinking, actually, of your topoid chapter, John, is
that, like, you know, the, like, the topoid or context, like, contexts never exist at all.
They are only ever, they're only ever made, they're only ever performed and enacted, and
at most, you know, like, you get the sense of a context having been made as sort of, like,
a secondary aftereffect of the cutting itself, of the decision of sort of separating out one
thing from another.
Right.
That's where, didn't we, we talked about this last time, because to me, when I taught
signature fan context, it was right after the Will Smith, Chris Rock slapping thing.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And all of those conversations that were just various attempts to contextualize the thing.
But, I mean, I agree with you, like, we're always contextualizing without necessarily thinking
that we're contextualizing.
We think we're talking about the text, which is, we're talking about Will Smith and Chris
Rock, but even doing that, I've already, right, like, anything that you're going to end up
saying, that you've already contextualized it in order to create anything to talk about,
much less a way of talking about it.
And so we're constantly doing those things.
I mean, to me, I guess I just have a more anthropocentric view of the thing, which is that I do actually
think that there are just other ways of thinking.
Like, I have no imaginable way of thinking what they are.
But, for example, like, I mean, even simple things, like, if we lived in a different solar
system, the idea in enlightenment would be ridiculous, right?
Like, that's entirely because of the solar system that we live in and the sun and what
it does for our species.
Like, if we could see infrared, enlightenment wouldn't be, you know.
So I believe there's a whole different order of conceptuality that's imaginable, not to
humans.
And so that's where, for me, the constant driving refrain is from Nietzsche, which is
to give birth to the overman.
And so that's where, for me, the constant driving refrain from Nietzsche.
And so that's where, for me, the constant driving refrain from Nietzsche
Thank you.